	Editor updates to Recommended Practice - Generic Names Document, 
	Version 1.3.

	Page 4, line 35: Changed 'should' to 'must'.           
	Page 4, lines 41 & 44: Added names to the "generic" names, Guideline 1
	Section.  The following names were added to the list:
			
		- fdc 
		- pc-card

	Page 5, lines 4, 11, 16 & 17: Added or changed names to the "generic" 
	names, Guideline 1 Section.  The following names were changed or added 
	to the list:
			
		- fiber-channel 
		- pc-card
		- interrupt-controller (removed letter 's') 
		- dma-controller (removed letter 's')    

	Page 5, line 24: Changed 'should' to 'must'.

	Page 5, Corrected title by changing 'Affect' to 'Effect'.

	Page 6: Removed PCI Section 6. information (Moved to PCI binding).  

	Page 6, Changed Section 7. title 'Compatibility Information' to 
	new Section 6. title 'Compatibility (Informative)'.

	Page 6, line 46: Added 'if' to the 'The intent is that if software ...'.

	Page 6, line 49: Removed italics from 'compatiblie'. 

	Page 7, lines 15 & 16: Changed wording from 'There may be additional 
	registers and/or commands which provide addtional functionality, but 
	manipulating them must not be required to operate the device in a 
	compatible fashion' to 'Additional registers and/or commands may exist
	which provide additional functionality, but manipulating them must not
	be required to operate the device in a compatible fashion'.

	Page 7, lines 21 & 22: Changed wording from 'There may be additional 
	device responses possible, but they must be disabled so that software
	receives only compatible responses' to 'Additional device responses may 
	be possible, but they must be disabled so that the software receives only
	compatible responses'.

	Page 7, line 33: Changed wording from 'There may be additional 
	properties, but their use must not be required for "compatible" 
	operation' to 'Additional properties may exist, but their use 
	must not be required for compatible operation'.

	Page 7, lines 40 - 43: Changed wording from 'There may be additional 
	entries in "reg", "interrupts", and similar properties, but their use
	must not be required for compatible operation.  Such entries may be added 
	only at the "end" of the property, after all entries defined by the 
	emulated device' to  'Aditional entries in "reg", "interrupts", and similar 
	properties may exist, but their use must not be required for "compatible" 
	operation.  Such entries may be added only at the "end" of the property, 
	after all entries defined by the emulated device'.

	Page 7, lines 45 & 46: Changed wording from 'No property defined by the
	emulated device may have a value other than those defined by the emulated
	device' to 'A property defined by the emulated device may not have a
	value other than those defined by the emulated device'.

	Page 8, line 2: Changed wording from 'There may be additional 
	methods, but their use must not be required for "compatible" operation'
	to 'Additional methods may exist, but their use must not be required 
	for compatible operations'.

	Page 8, lines 8 & 9: Changed wording from 'There may be additional 
	values for arguments to methods, but their use must not be required
	for compatible operation' to 'Additional argument values for methods may
	exist, but their use must not be required for "compatible" operation'.

	Page 8, lines 11 & 12: Changed wording from 'Results returned by methods
	defined by the emulated device must have values as defined by the  
	emulated device' to 'Methods return values defined by the emulated
	device must have values as defined by the emulated device.

	Page 8, lines 23 - 26: Changed wording from 'Registers, portions of  
	registers, commands, methods, properties, and behaviors marked in the
	emulated device as "reserved", "undefined", "obsolete" "do not use",
	et cetera, may have different semantics in the emulating device' to 
	'Any registers, portions of registers, commands, methods, properties, 
	and behaviors marked in the emulated device as "reserved", "undefined", 
	"obsolete", "do not use", et cetera, may have different semantics in the 
	emulating device.

	Page 8, lines 30 - 32: Changed wording from 'The absolute register 
	addresses, interrupt routing, and so on may differ between the two 
	devices.  Software must use properties supplied to determine these values 
	and must not make assumptions based on the device identification'
	to 'Absolute register addresses, interrupt routing, et cetera, may differ 
	between two devices.  Software must use the properties supplied to 
	determine these values and must not make assumptions based on the 
	device identification'.

	Page 8, line 34: Changed wording from 'Electrical interfaces may 
	differ between the two devices' to 'Two devices may have different 
	electrical interfaces'.

	Page 8, line 36: Changed wording from 'Physical appearance and packaging 
	may differ between two devices' to 'Two devices may have different 
	physical appearance and packaging'.

	Page 8, lines 38: Changed wording from 'Labelling, jumpers, switches,
	installation procedures, and so on may differ between the two devices'
	to 'Two devices may have different labeling, jumpers,
	installation procedures, etc.'.

	Page 8, lines 45 & 46: Removed italics from compatible. 

	Page 8, lines 55 & 56: Edited last to sentence to improve readability.

