From: rlarndt@austin.ibm.com (Richard L. Arndt)
Subject: Item #229: Halt-Hibernate
Date: Mon, 06 Feb 95 16:28:12 -0600

P1275 Open Firmware Working Group Proposal -- Proposal #229 Ver <Auth-Vers#>

Title:          Halt-Hibernate

Author:         R. L. Arndt rlarndt@austin.ibm.com

Date:           6 Feb 95

Ed/Tech:        Technical

Synopsis:       Add mandatory support of the halt string "hibernate"

Doc & Version:  PowerPC processor binding -- dated: 941006

Problem:        Need mechanisms for creating and restoring the ram image
                in support of hardware hibernation function.

Proposal:

The firmware shall support the halt string "hibernate" in the following
manner.

Function:
 1. The firmware shall write the ram image exclusive of that devoted to
firmware use (see System State at call below) to the IPL disk's halt
partition.
 2. If the firmware encounters an error or the hardware does not
support hibernate the halt procedure shall set the appropriate return code
(see System State at return below) and return to the caller.
 3. The firmware shall record hibernation restoration parameters in the
system's configuration memory.
 4. The firmware shall set the system power state to hibernate in a system
dependent manner (this usually means powering down the machine).
 5. When the system is subsequently powered up, the firmware reads the
hibernation restoration parameters and:
 6. Initializes the system hardware as on IPL.
 7. Rather than loading the standard client program, loads the saved ram
image from the halt partition.
 8. Resets the hibernation restoration parameters in configuration memory.
 9. Returns to the caller of hibernation (see System State at Return
below).

System State at call:
 Memory:
        The memory range defined by the "real-base" and "real-size"
        configuration variable is undefined but available for use by open
        firmware.
 Master processor:
        As specified for other halt call-back functions.
        |%r3 | -halt argument-> | 1st pointer | --> hibernate[0]
 Slave Processors:
        In an SMP system only one processor shall call the Halt procedure
        with a halt string of "hibernate" all other processors shall call
        the halt procedure with the halt string "slave".  The Halt
        procedure may cause the slave processors to loop in a program that
        does not change the state of memory.
        |%r3 | -halt argument-> | 1st pointer | --> slave[0]
 IO Sub-system:
        All elements of the IO sub-system shall be in a safe state.  In a
        safe state, they shall not be transferring data to or from memory
        nor shall they cause an interrupt to any processor.
 Interrupt Sub-system:
        The processor's MSR EE=0 prior to calling the Halt procedure.
 Disk Halt partition:
        The halt partition on the IPL disk shall consist of contiguous
        blocks of storage.  The size requirement of the halt partition is
        system dependent

System State at return:
 Memory:
        The state of the memory locations, exclusive of the range defined
        by the "real-base" and "real-size" configuration variables, shall
        be restored to the state they were in at the call to the Halt
        procedure.
 Master Processor:
        The state of the master processor shall be as defined for the
        "initial program state" with the following exceptions.  The
        processor will start executing at the address which was in the
        master processor's link register when the Halt procedure was
        called. %r3 shall contain the return code see below.
 Slave Processors:
        The state of the slave processors upon restoration from hibernation
        shall as follows: The MSR as defined for "initial program state".
        All non-architected processor dependent registers shall be set to
        the system dependent default value. All other architected registers
        are undefined. The processor shall start executing at the address
        which was in the slave processor's link register when the Halt
        procedure was called. %r3 shall contain the return code 0.
 IO Sub-system:
        All elements of the IO sub-system shall be initialized to a safe
        state.  The device tree shall be re-established as on IPL.
 Interrupt Sub-system:
        The processor's MSR EE=0.
 Return Codes:
        0 -> Restored from hibernation / slave
        -1 -> Hardware does not support hibernate power state
        -2 -> Hardware write error
        -3 -> No Halt partition
        -4 -> Halt partition too small




[ P1275 Item #229 -- Received: Mon Feb  6 14:30:52 PST 1995 ]

