Date: Wed, 1 Mar 1995 09:08:29 -0700
From: ron@apple.com (Ron Hochsprung)
Subject: Item #237: Open Firmware core - Multi-color Text

P1275 Open Firmware Working Group Proposal -- Proposal #237 Ver <Auth-Vers#>

Title:          Multi-color text

Author:         Ron Hochsprung

Date:           Mar 1, 1195

Ed/Tech:        Technical

Synopsis:       add multi-color text support to Open Firmware

Doc & Version:  IEEE Std 1275-1994

Problem:        new clients require this support

Proposal:

                        Open Firmware Proposal

Title: Multi-color text

Authors: Mitch Bradley, Ron Hochsprung

Date: Mar. 1, 1995

Revision: 3

Scope/Documents Affected: Core standard (next revision)


Motivation: Support multiple colors for text, according to ISO 6429-1983,
which defines the 16-color set used by PCs and the escape sequences to
select colors.  These capabilities are required by the ARC spec and the PR*P
spec.

References: [1] IEEE Std 1275-1994, [2] ISO 6429-1983, [3] PowerPC Binding

Goals: compatibility with both existing FCode drivers and existing systems.

Proposal:

Add the following to the next revision or followon to IEEE 1275.  In the
meantime, publish it through whatever means are available to us, and
include it as a requirement for future ISA bindings.

Section: Introduction

IEEE Std 1275-1994 defines the behavior of the Terminal Emulator Support
Package (see Annex B of [1]).  Annex B assumes that the Terminal
Emulator Support Package implements certain escape sequences from the
set defined by ANSI X3.64. The extension described here corresponds to
ISO 6429-1983, as defined by [2].  An implementation of Open Firmware
for PowerPC [3] is required to support additional graphic renditions (via
the SGR - Select Graphic Rendition - ESC[#m) beyond those specified in
Annex B.

The extended model adds new FCodes that represent the current values of
the BACKGROUND-COLOR and FOREGROUND-COLOR that are used by the Terminal
Emulator for displaying text.  These values are considered indices into a
"color table" for the display buffer.  This extension defines the values
for the first 16 color entries.

Note: these FCodes enable a display driver for a card that does not
directly implement an 8-bit display buffer (e.g., a 24-bit-only frame
buffer) to work with the color extensions.  These drivers need access to
the Terminal Emulator's color indices so that they can emulate the
extended color behavior of DRAW-CHARACTER, etc. that they must have
overridden.

The SGR parameters specify changes to the color and intensity of the
foreground and background indices that will be subsequently used by the
Terminal Emulator.  The ISO 6429-1983 standard provides parameter values to
independently control the color of foreground (30-37) and background
(40-47).  The intensity is set separately (1-2), and must be issued before
the color control; 1 -> color, 2 -> color+8.

The expanded model of the Terminal Emulator is that there is a "current"
background and foreground color (index), the first 16 of which are defined
for use by this extension, corresponding to the first 16 entries of the
color table.  In positive image mode, pixels corresponding to a font (logo)
bit set (1) will be set to the foreground color;  pixels corresponding to a
font (logo) bit clear (0) will be set to the background color. When in
negative image mode, the roles of foreground and background are reversed.

An FCode display driver that supports this extension declares so by
defining a new property (ISO6249-1983-COLORS) that indicates the support
of these additional methods.  Likewise, an Open Firmware implementation
declares its support of this extension by publishing the property within
a /packages/terminal-emulator node.


Section: Requirements

A system that implements the multi-color text extension shall implement the
following, as FCode Functions, if the Device Interface is implemented, and as
User Interface commands if the FCode Debugging command group of the User
Interface is present.

New terminal emulator values:

foreground-color        ( -- color-index )              F       0x168

        value, indicates how to paint color characters

        The set of permissible values for color-index, and their meanings,
        is given in Table 2.  foreground-color is set by the terminal
        emulator package and used by display device drivers and the fb8
        support package.

background-color        ( -- color-index )              F       0x169

        value, indicates how to paint color text backgound

        The set of permissible values for color-index, and their meanings,
        is given in Table 2.  background-color is set by the terminal
        emulator package and used by display device drivers and the fb8
        support package.

Section: Terminal Emulator Package

The "/packages" node shall have a child node named "terminal-emulator".
That terminal-emulator package shall have the following property:

   "iso6429-1983-colors"        S

        Standard 'property-name' to indicate color text capability

        'prop-encoded-array':
           None; presence or absence of the property conveys the information.

        The presence of this property indicates that the system implements
        the multi-color text extension.  Specifically, it implies that the
        terminal emulator support package responds to the color-setting
        variants of the Select Graphics Rendition escape sequence as defined
        by ISO 6429-1983, that the foreground-color and background-color
        values are implemented, and that the fb8 support package responds
        to those values.

        Absence of this property within a device node named
        /packages/terminal-emulator indicates that the terminal emulator and
        fb8 support packages do not support multi-color text.

Absence of a device node named /package/terminal-emulator indicates that
the terminal emulator and fb8 support packages do not support multi-color
text.

Note: the iso6429-1983-colors property is intended for the use of
client programs that need to determine whether or not the firmware is
capable of displaying multi-color text.  In addition to the
iso6429-1983-colors property in /packages/terminal-emulator, a client
program should also look for the iso6429-1983-colors property in the
package corresponding to the console output device, because the fact
that the firmware system supports multi-color text does not
necessarily imply that the individual display device driver does.

This specification does not require the presence of open and close
methods in the /packages/terminal-emulator.  Therefore, it is not
necessarily possible to open that node (e.g. with open-package).

When initialized, the terminal emulator package shall set the initial
state of the following values as follows:

        inverse?                false
        inverse-screen?         false
        foreground-color        0
        background-color        15

The terminal emulator package shall respond to the numeric parameters for
the select graphics rendition escape sequence shown in table 1 by setting
foreground-color, background-color and inverse? to values corresponding
to the interpretation column.  Appropriate values for foreground-color and
background-color are given in Table 1.  "positive image" corresponds to
inverse?=true, and "negative image" to inverse?=false.

        Index   Red     Green   Blue    Color
        0       0       0       0       Black
        1       0       0       2/3     Blue
        2       0       2/3     0       Green
        3       0       2/3     2/3     Cyan
        4       2/3     0       0       Red
        5       2/3     0       2/3     Magenta
        6       2/3     1/3     0       Brown
        7       2/3     2/3     2/3     White
        8       1/3     1/3     1/3     Gray
        9       1/3     1/3     1       Light Blue
        10      1/3     1       1/3     Light Green
        11      1/3     1       1       Light Cyan
        12      1       1/3     1/3     Light Red
        13      1       1/3     1       Light Magenta
        14      1       1       1/3     Yellow
        15      1       1       1       Bright White
        Table  1.  Color Table Values

The 'default rendition' shall be black foreground (i.e. foreground-color=0),
bright (bold) white background (background-color=15) and positive image (i.e.
inverse?=false).

The Terminal Emulator shall interpret the parameters of the Select Graphic
Rendition (ESC[#m) sequence as follows:

    parameter  0 affects foreground-color, background-color, and inverse?.
    parameters 1 and 2 affect either foreground-color or background-color,
        depending on the following parameter.
    parameters 30-37 affect foreground-color.
    parameters 40-47 affect backgrond-color.
    parameters 7 and 27 affect inverse?.

        Param   Interpretation
        0       default rendition
        1       bold (increased intensity)
        2       faint (decreased intensity)
        7       negative image
        27      positive image
        30      black foreground
        31      red foreground
        32      green foreground
        33      yellow foreground
        34      blue foreground
        35      magenta foreground
        36      cyan foreground
        37      white foreground
        40      black background
        41      red background
        42      green background
        43      yellow background
        44      blue background
        45      magenta background
        46      cyan background
        47      white background
        Table  2.  SGR Parameters

Section: fb8 support package

A system that implements multi-color text shall implement the following
additional semantics for the fb8 support package.

If the package corresponding to the device instance that executed
fb8-install has a property named "iso6429-1983-colors", the operations of
the fb8 support package shall be performed according to the specifications
given below for "multi-color mode"; otherwise they shall be performed as
specified in IEEE 1275-1994.

Definitions:

effective background index
        the value of background-color if inverse? is false, otherwise the
        value of foreground-color

effective foreground index
        the value of foreground-color if inverse? is false, otherwise the
        value of background-color

Section: Drawing operations in multi-color mode

fb8 operations that move portions of the text window to (possibly)
different locations within the text window shall preserve the exiting
color indices of the moved regions.

fb8 operations that set portions of the text background to a solid color
shall set the pixels of the affected regions to the effective background
index.

fb8-draw-character and fb8-draw-logo shall set the display pixels
corresponding to "zero" bits in the logo or character bitmap image to the
effective background color, and display pixels corresponding to "one" bits
in the logo or character bitmap image to the effective foreground color.

fb8-invert-screen and fb8-toggle-cursor shall modify the pixels of the
display regions that they affect as follows:

          Existing color index              New color index

        effective foreground color      effective background color
        effective background color      effective foreground color
                other                           unchanged

Section: Other "display" packages

Definition:

        multi-color display package:
                A package whose "device_type" is "display" that implements
                the multi-color text extension.

A multi-color display package shall implement the following property:

   "iso6429-1983-colors"        S

        Standard 'property-name' to indicate color text capability

        'prop-encoded-array':
           None; presence or absence of the property conveys the information.

        The presence of this property within a package whose "device_type"
        is "display" indicates that the package implements the multi-color
        text extension.  Specifically, it implies that the package displays
        text according to the values of foreground-color and background-color
        if the system implements those values.

        Absence of this property within a display package implies that the
        package does not implement the multi-color text extension.

A multi-color display package shall implement the following methods:

    set-colors        ( adr index #indices -- )
        This method allows the setting of a number of consecutive colors,
        starting at the 'index' color, for '#indices' number of entries.  'adr'
        is the address of a table of packed R-G-B components.

    get-colors        ( adr index #indices -- )
        This method allows the reading of a number of consecutive colors,
        starting at the 'index' color, for '#indices' number of colors.  'adr'
        is the address of a table that will be filled in with packed R-G-B
        components.

    color!            ( r g b index -- )
        This method allows the setting of a single color value, specified by
        'index'.  'r', 'g' and 'b' are the values to be placed into the Red,
        Green and Blue components, respectively.

    color@            ( index -- r g b )
        This method allows the reading of the color components of a single color
        value, specified by 'index'.   'r', 'g' and 'b' are the values of the
        Red, Green and Blue components, respectively.


The following additional requirements apply to multi-color display packages:

The package shall determine whether or not the system implements
foreground-color.  If not, the package shall implement its drawing
operations in a manner consistent with the requirements of IEEE Std
1275-1994, including the use of inverse? and inverse-screen? to determine
foreground and background colors.  If so, the package shall implement its
drawing operations so that foreground and background colors are determined
by the effective foreground and background indices as defined for the fb8
support package in multi-color mode, with meanings of those indices as given
in Table 1.

Note: The preferred method for an FCode Program to determine the presence
or absence of foreground-color is as follows:

        h# 168 get-token drop  ['] fcode-error  =   ( absent? )

Note: In order to use the fb8 support package to assist in implementing the
multi-color drawing operations, a display package must setup its color
translation mechanism so the correspondence between pixel values in the
frame buffer memory and displayed colors is as given in Table 1.  This
does not necessarily imply that a multi-color display package must use the
fb8 support package, nor does it require that the display hardware must
use color indices 0-15 directly.  The fundamental requirement is that
the effective color indices 0..15 (as communicated to the display package
by the values foreground-color, background-color, and inverse?) must
cause to the drawing operations to generate the colors given by Table 1.
The mechanism for doing this is the individual driver's responsibility.
The fb8 support package is simply a convenient implementation tool for
devices that conform to the widely-used hardware model of an 8-bit-per-pixel
frame buffer with a color lookup table.



[ P1275 Item #237 -- Received: Wed Mar  1 09:10:41 PST 1995 ]

