Date: Thu, 1 Jun 1995 11:52:58 -0700
From: jordan@pongo.West.Sun.COM (Jordan Brown)
Subject: Item #274: PCI "reg" property clarification

P1275 Openboot Working Group Proposal -- Proposal #:274 Ver 1.0

Title:          PCI "reg" property clarification

Author:         Jordan Brown

Date:           31 May 1995

Ed/Tech:        Technical

Synopsis:       Clarify the relationship between base registers and OF properties

Doc & Version:  PCI binding 1.5

Problem:

	The relationship between PCI base registers, the "reg"
	property, the "assigned-addresses" property, and actual
	physical addresses is complex, and a simple reading of the PCI
	binding does not make it obvious.

Proposal:       


Add after the "Legacy Devices" section the following:

	Relationship between PCI Base Registers and Open Firmware
	Properties

	Especially in the case of a PCI device with onboard Fcode
	support, there is no particular relationship between PCI base
	registers and the "reg" and "assigned-addresses" property.  A
	particular base register may or may not be represented in "reg"
	and "assigned-addresses", and those properties may contain
	entries referring to addresses not controlled by any base
	register.  No particular ordering is required in either the
	"reg" property or the "assigned-addresses" property.  A client
	wishing to make use of the addressing information provided by
	Open Firmware must scan the "assigned-addresses" property
	looking for an entry specifying the desired base-register field
	in its phys.hi.

In "Open Firmware-defined Properties for Child Nodes", under "reg":

After
	Each additional (phys-addr, size) pair shall specify the address
	of an addressable region of Memory Space or I/O Space associated
	with the function.
add
	In these pairs, if the "n" bit of phys.hi is 0, reflecting a
	relocatable address, then phys.mid and phys.lo specify an
	address relative to the value of the associated base register.
	In general this value will be zero, specifying an address range
	corresponding directly to the hardware's.  If the "n" bit of
	phys.hi is 1, reflecting a non-relocatable address, then
	phys.mid and phys.hi specify an absolute PCI address.

In "Bus-specific Properties for Child Nodes", under "assigned-addresses":

Change as indicated:

	The entry indicates the physical /+ PCI +/ address that has
	been assigned to that base register, and the size in bytes of
	the assigned region.
	

---

[[ I don't particularly *like* these definitions, but as far as I can
tell from reading and conversations, they're the truth.  As I have on
several occasions had to convince developers of this, it seems appropriate
to put it in black and white. -- jb ]]


[ P1275 Item #274 -- Received: Thu Jun  1 11:57:09 PDT 1995 ]

