From: coffin@VNET.IBM.COM
Date: Thu, 29 Feb 96 11:23:56 CST
Subject: Item #320: ISA Binding: Define new physical address format ...

P1275 Openboot Working Group Proposal -- Proposal #:320 Ver 1.0

Title:          ISA binding changes:
                  1) Definition for "phys.hi" cell
                  2) Definition for first "reg" property component
                  3) Definition of a different "Data Resource" Structure

Author:         R. T. Coffin

Date:           02/29/96

Ed/Tech:        Technical

Synopsis:       Define a new "phys.hi" cell format to facilitate a
                more consistent ISA 'unit address' and naming convention.

Doc & Version:  ISA/EISA/ISA-PnP binding; Version 0.1 DRAFT

Problem:        Facilitate keeping an ISA Device pathname consistent across
                configuration changes and/or boots, provide 'geographical'
                slot/bus address information and to be more consistent with a
                PCI Bus binding approach.

Proposal:

1) 'phys.hi' cell definition:

Redefine the 'phys.hi' cell for the ISA binding Physcial Address Format(Section
2.2.1):

      Bit#:  3       2 2      1 1      0 0      0
             1       4 3      6 5      8 7      0

'phys.hi'    vt00000ss cccccccc nnnnnfff rrrrrrrr  where:

             v         -  1 indicates 11-bit aliased I/O address
             t         -  1 indicates 10-bit aliased I/O address
             ss        -  2-bit field denoting memory or I/O Space
                           00 - Config space
                           01 - I/O space
                           10 - Memory space
                           11 - reserved
             cccccccc  -  CSN Number
             nnnnn     -  Bus Slot Number
             fff       -  Function number
             rrrrrrrr  -  Register address (or reserved)

Field 'cccccccc':

The ISA config utility would assign this number for each PnP Adapter
after the 'Isolation Protocol' phase.  This would be a variable assigned to
the card resource data in the platform's NVRAM.

For an ISA/EISA Adapter, the ISA config utility would generate this number
from an algorithm such that each bus resource (adapter and/or 'built-in'
device) would have a unique CSN Number.

Field 'nnnnn':

The ISA configuration utility would put this information in the platform NVRAM
area associated with this adapter's resource data.  This would be user supplied
information, through the ISA config utility, that would be platform
dependent identifying the 'plug-in' adapter's ISA/EISA bus slot.  For the
platform 'built-in' ISA devices, the number would be assigned by the ISA
config utility.  The 'nnnnn' would be the integer portion of the "slot-names"
property, section 3.1.2.

Field 'fff':

The ISA configuration utility would provide this number for a
multi-function adapter.  For a PnP Adapter, this number would be derived from
the 'Logical Device ID' Record.  For ISA or EISA, this numbr would be generated
by the ISA config utility and user interaction.

Field 'rrrrrrrr':

Could use for register addressing for a configuration cycle ('ss' = 00).
Is a 8-bit field useful? If not, just reserve for future defintion or usage.


2) "Reg" property: first component

First component of the "reg" property is defined by the new 'phys.hi' cell
format, 'ss'='00'(config cycle). A suggested unit address format would be
'cccccccc,fff', where the CSN number would be unique for each adapter and
resolve any ambiguity addressing multiple identical vendor adapters; i.g., like
two identical eithernet adapters on the ISA bus.

The CSN number could provide a cross-reference to a bus slot number so that
there would be a geographical relationship for all platform ISA 'built-in' and
'plug-in' Adapters(with respect to relating information to a user).

3) Data Resource Definition (General):

General suggestion for the data resource structure: put in the form of
'allocated' resources(what an adapter/logical function is actually using)
and 'possible allocated' resources(what an adapter/logical function could
possibly use).  The 'possible allocated' section would be useful for the ISA
config utility when resources had to be moved around for a reconfiguration
(could also assist the user, possibly preventing re-entering of all the config
data again).

Example: General Structure


PnP Header Structure

(begin allocated tag)
Specify resources; interrupts, dma channel, I/O space, system memory space,
etc.
(end allocated tag)

(begin possible allocated tag)
Specify resources, indicate dependencies with a PnP like data structure (See
'Start Dependent Function Record', Section 6.3.13).
(end possible allocated tag)

Don't do the new properties "interrupt-choices" and "dma-choices", but just
leave this tag structure in the appropriate platform NVRAM area.  Let the ISA
config utiltiy use this area for reconfig information.












[ P1275 Item #320 -- Received: Thu Feb 29 09:31:08 PST 1996 ]

