Date: Thu, 14 Mar 1996 16:34:45 -0800
From: pt@jadeite (Paul Thomas)
Subject: Item #328: SCSI-3 Binding: Create binding document


P1275 Openboot Working Group Proposal -- Proposal #:328 Ver 1

Title:          1275 Bindings for SCSI-3

Author:         Paul Thomas

Date:           March 14, 1986

Ed/Tech:        Technical

Synopsis:       A draft of the content for a SCSI-3 binding is presented.

Doc & Version:  SCSI-3 Binding

Problem:        

There is interest in developing a document for the bindings between SCSI-3
and 1275.


Proposal:       

The following is the content of a standard binding SCSI-3 (ANS X3T10/Project
994D) to 1275.  The boilerplate is missing.


1.  Physical address formats and representations

SCSI-3 devices are addressed with two 32-bit "target" identifiers and two
32-bit "logical unit" identifiers.

The numerical representation of a SCSI-3 bus physical address consists of the
most significant target identifier in the high number, the least significant
target identifier in the next position, the most significant logical unit
identifier third, and the least significant logical unit identifier in the low
number.  The text string representation is targethi,targetlo,lunhi,lunlo,
where targethi, targetlo, lunhi, and lunlo are all hexadecimal numbers.

The significance of the bits in the target identifiers and the bits in the
logical unit identifiers is determined by a combination of the particular
scsi-3 device and the particular scsi-3 target identified by the target
identifiers:

   In the case where the physical implementation of the scsi-3 device satisfies
	Fibre Channel Arbitrated Loop (FC-AL), the target identifiers are the
	most significant 32 bits of the wwn of the target as targethi, the
	least significant 32 bits of the wwn as targetlo, the most significant
	32 bits of the logical unit identifier as lunhi, and the least
	significant 32 bits of the logical unit identifier as lunlo.  The
	64 total bits of the logical unit identifier are interpreted by the
	target.

   In the case where the physical implementation of the scsi-3 device satisfies
	SCSI-3 Parallel Interface (SPI), the target identifiers are 0 for
	targethi and the 5-bit target id embedded as the low bits of the 32-bit
	targetlo.  The most significant 32 bits of the logical unit identifier
	form lunhi and the least significant 32 bits are lunlo, for a total of
	64 bits as interpreted by the target.

   In the case where the physical implementation of the scsi-3 device satisfies
	Fibre Channel Protocol for SCSI (FCP), the target identifiers are the
	most significant 32 bits of the wwn of the target as targethi, the
	least significant 32 bits of the wwn as targetlo, the most significant
	32 bits of the logical unit identifier as lunhi, and the least
	significant 32 bits of the logical unit identifier as lunlo.  The
	64 total bits of the logical unit identifier are interpreted by the
	target.


2.  Properties

These properties are required for all scsi-3 devices:

   device_type		scsi-3
   #address-cells	4
   scsi3-id		byte array, 8 bytes in size


These properties are required when the physical implementation satisfies SPI
if the device is differential or capable of 16 bit parallel data transfers:

   wide
   differential


   scsi-initiator-id	integer
   wwn			byte array, 8 bytes in size
   local-wwn		byte array, 8 bytes in size

If the physical implementation is SPI, scsi-initiator-id is required.  If
the interface is FC-AL or FCP, wwn is required.  If wwn is derived via the
mac-address/local-mac-address interaction, local-wwn is required if the
device has one.

In either case, scsi3-id is required.  If scsi-initiator-id exists, scsi3-id
is the same with the integer embedded in the least significant bits of the
byte array.  If wwn exists, scsi3-id is the same as wwn.


3.  Methods

These methods are required (descriptions as per the current descriptions for
SCSI-2 where not given here):

   close  ( -- )

   decode-unit  ( addr len -- lunlo lunhi targetlo targethi )

   diagnose  ( -- error-code | 0 )

   dma-alloc  ( ...size -- virt )

   dma-free  ( virt size -- )

   encode-unit  ( lunlo lunhi targetlo targethi -- addr len )

   execute-command  ( buf-addr,len dir cmd-addr,len -- hw-err? | statbyte 0 )

   max-transfer  ( -- n )

   no-data-command  ( cmd-addr -- error? )

   open  ( -- okay? )
	If the physical implementation is SPI, the interaction with
	inherited scsi-initiator-id is required.  If the physical
	implementation is FC-AL or FCP, and the wwn for the device is
	derived via the mac-address/local-mac-address interaction, then
	the wwn for the device must be checked when open runs.

   retry-command  ( buf-addr,len dir cmd-addr,len #retries -- 
					0 | hw-err? stat | sensebuf 0 stat )

   set-responder  ( unit-addr,len target-addr,len -- )
	Unit-addr,len points to an array of bytes holding a binary
	representation of the desired unit identifier, most significant bits
	first.  Target-addr,len points to a similar array of bytes for the
	desired target identifier.

[Note: set-responder replaces set-address from the scsi-2 set of methods.]

   set-timeout  ( msecs -- )

   short-data-command  ( data-len cmd-addr,len -- error? | data-addr 0 )

   translate-address  ( unit1-addr,len target1-addr,len --
					unit2-addr,len target2-addr,len )
	Unit1-addr,len points to an array of bytes holding a binary
	representation of the desired unit identifier, most significant bits
	first.  Target1-addr,len is similar for the desired target identifier.
	Unit2-addr,len points to an array of bytes holding a binary
	representation of the desired unit identifier as translated for use
	inside a scsi-3 command block in the current physical implementation.
	Target2-addr,len is a similar translation for the desired target
	identifier for the current physical implementation.

[Note: translate-address may not be required.  It would be used by commands
 such as copy that need to know the wwn in order to include it in their
 command packet or data.]


This method is optional:

   show-children  ( -- )


[ P1275 Item #328 -- Received: Thu Mar 14 16:32:42 PST 1996 ]

